Hierarchical Routing Algorithm 
 
When network size is growing, the number of routers in the network will increase. 
Therefore, the size of routing table increases, then routers cannot handle network traffic as 
efficiently. To overcome this problem we are using hierarchical routing. 
In hierarchical routing, routers are classified in groups called regions. Each router has 
information about the routers in its own region and it has no information about routers in other 
regions. So, routers save one record in their table for every other region. 
For huge networks, a two-level hierarchy may be insufficient hence, it may be necessary to 
group the regions into clusters, the clusters into zones, the zones into groups and so on. 
Hierarchical routing is widely used in Internet routing and makes use of several routing 
protocols. 
 
Broadcast Routing 
Sending a packet to all destinations simultaneously is called broadcasting. 
Examples: 


Weather reports, stock market updates, live radio programs etc., 
Methods of broadcasting: 
 Distinct Point to Point routing : A router creates a data packet and then sends it 
to each host one by one. In this case, the router creates multiple copies of single 
data packet with different destination addresses. All packets are sent as unicast 
but because they are sent to all, it simulates as if router is broadcasting. 
This method consumes lots of bandwidth and router must have a complete list 
of all destinations. 
 
 Flooding : When router receives a packet that is to be broadcasted, it simply 
floods those packets out of all interfaces. All routers are configured in the same 
way. This method is easy on router's CPU but may cause the problem of 
duplicate packets received from peer routers. 
 
 Multidestination Routing: Here each packet contains either a list of 
destinations or a bit map indicating the desired destinations. When a packet 
arrives at a router,the router checks all the destinations to determine the set of 
output lines that will be needed.The router generates a new copy of the packet 
for each output line to be used and includes in each packet only those 
destinations that are to use the line. 
 
 Spanning Tree :  Here we use sink treefor the router initiating the broadcast.  A 
spanning tree is a subset of the subnet that includes all the routers but contains 
no loops. 
 
 Reverse path forwarding :  Reverse path forwarding is a technique, in which 
router knows in advance about its predecessor from where it should receive 
broadcast. This technique is used to detect and discard duplicates. 

 
Multicast Routing 
Multicast routing is special case of broadcast routing with significance difference and 
challenges. In broadcast routing, packets are sent to all nodes even if they do not want 
it. But in Multicast routing, the data is sent to only nodes which wants to receive the 
packets. 
 
The router must know that there are nodes, which wish to receive multicast packets (or 
stream) then only it should forward. Multicast routing works spanning tree protocol to 
avoid looping. 
Multicast routing also uses reverse path Forwarding technique, to detect and discard 
duplicates and loops. 
Multicast Routing Protocols 
Unicast routing protocols use graphs while Multicast routing protocols use trees, i.e. 
spanning tree to avoid loops. The optimal tree is called shortest path spanning tree. 


 DVMRP  - Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol 
 MOSPF  - Multicast Open Shortest Path First 
 CBT  - Core Based Tree 
 PIM  - Protocol independent Multicast 
Protocol Independent Multicast is commonly used now. It has two flavors: 
 PIM Dense Mode 
This mode uses source -based trees. It is used in dense environment such as 
LAN. 
 PIM Sparse Mode 
This mode uses shared trees. It is used in sparse environment such as WAN. 
 
Difference between Broadcast and Multicast :  
 
S.No. Broadcast Multicast 
1. It has one sender and multiple receivers. 
It has one or more senders and 
multiple receivers. 
2. 
It sent data from one device to all the 
other devices in a network. 
It sent data from one device to 
multiple devices. 
3. It works on star and bus topology. 
It works on star, mesh, tree and 
hybrid topology. 
4. It scale well across large networks. 
It does not scale well across 
large networks. 
5. Its bandwidth is wasted. It utilizes bandwidth efficiently. 
6. It has one-to-all mapping. It has one-to-many mapping. 
7. 
Hub is an example of a broadcast 
device. 
Switch is an example of a 
multicast device. 
 
Routing for Mobile Hosts 

 
Millions of people use computers while on go, from the truly mobile situations 
with a wireless device in moving  cars, to nomadic situations in which laptop 
computers are used in a series of a different location. We use the term mobile 
hosts to mean either category, as distinct from stationary hosts that never 
move. The mobile hosts introduce a new complication to r oute packets to the 
mobile hosts, the network first has to find it.  
Assumed model : 
 
The model of the world that we will consider is one in which all hosts are 
assumed to have a permanent home location that never changes. Each host 
has a permanent home address that can be used to determine home location. 
Like the telephone number 1 -212-5551212 indicates the United States (country 
code 1) and Manhattan (212).  
Feature : 
 The basic idea used for mobile routing on the internet and cellular network is 
for the mobile hosts to tell the host at the home location.  
 This host, which acts on behalf of the mobile host called a home agent.  
 Once it knows where the mobile host currently located, it can forward 
packets so that they are delivered. The figure shows mobile ro uting in action. 
 The local address called care -of address. 
 Once it has this address it can tell its home agent where it is now. It does 
this by sending registration message to home agent with care of address.  
 
Description of Diagram :  
 
The message is shown with a dashed line in the figure indicate that it is a 
control message, not a data message. The sender sends a data packet to the 
mobile host using its permanent address. This packet is routed by the network 
to the host home location b ecause the home addresses belong there. It 
encapsulates the packet with a new header and sends this bundle to the care -of 
address. This mechanism is called tunneling. It is very important on the internet.  
Diagram : 
 
 

 
 
 When the encapsulated packet arrives at the care -of address, the mobile 
host unwraps it and retrieves the packet from the sender.  
 The overall route is called triangle routing because it way is circuitous if the 
remote location is far from the home location.  
 As part of the step, 4 send ers learns the current care -of address. 
 Subsequent packets can be routed directly to the mobile host by tunneling 
them to the care-of address (step 5) bypassing the home location.  
 If connectivity lost for any reason as the mobile moves, the home address 
can always be used to reach the mobile.  
 
Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) Routing 
In Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET), nodes do not know the topology of their 
network, instead they have to discover it by their own as the topology in the ad -
hoc network is dynamic topology. The basic rules is that a new node whenever 
enters into an ad -hoc network, must announce its arrival and presence and 
should also listen to similar announcement broadcasts made by other mobile 
nodes. 


 
1. Pro-active routing protocols: 
These are also known as table -driven routing protocols. Each mobile node 
maintains a separate routing table which contains the information of the routes 
to all the possible destination mobile nodes.  
Since the topology in the mobile ad -hoc network is dynamic, these routing 
tables are updated periodically as and when the network topology changes. It 
has a limitation that is doesn’t work well for the large networks as the entries in 
the routing table becomes too large since they need to maintain the  route 
information to all possible nodes.  
1. Destination Sequenced Distance Vector Routing Protocol (DSDV):  
It is a pro-active/table driven routing protocol. It actually extends the distance 
vector routing protocol of the wired networks as the name suggests. It is 
based on the Bellman -ford routing algorithm. Distance vector routing 
protocol was not suited for mobile ad -hoc networks due to count -to-infinity 
problem. Hence, as a solution Destination Sequenced Distance Vector 
Routing Protocol (DSDV) came into pic ture. 
Destination sequence number is added with every routing entry in the routing 
table maintained by each node. A node will include the new update in the 
table only if the entry consists of the new updated route to the destination 
with higher sequence nu mber. 
2. Global State Routing (GSR):  
It is a pro-active/table driven routing protocol. It actually extends the link 
state routing of the wired networks. It is based on the Dijkstra’s routing 
algorithm. Link state routing protocol was not suited for mobile ad -hoc 
networks because in it, each node floods the link state routing information 
directly into the whole network i.e. Global flooding which may lead to the 
congestion of control packets in the network.  


Hence, as a solution Global State Routing Routing Proto col (GSR) came into 
the picture. Global state routing doesn’t flood the link state routing packets 
globally into the network. In GSR, each of the mobile node maintains one list 
and three tables namely, adjacency list, topology table, next hop table and 
distance table. 
2. Reactive routing protocols:  
These are also known as on -demand routing protocol. In this type of routing, 
the route is discovered only when it is required/needed. The process of route 
discovery occurs by flooding the route request packets th roughout the mobile 
network. It consists of two major phases namely, route discovery and route 
maintenance. 
1. Dynamic Source Routing protocol (DSR):  
It is a reactive/on -demand routing protocol. In this type of routing, the route 
is discovered only when it is  required/needed. The process of route 
discovery occurs by flooding the route request packets throughout the 
mobile network.  
It consists of two phases:  
 Route Discovery:  
This phase determines the most optimal path for the transmission of data 
packets between the source and the destination mobile nodes.  
 Route Maintenance:  
This phase performs the maintenance work of the route as the topology in 
the mobile ad-hoc network is dynamic in nature and hence, there are 
many cases of link breakage resulting in the netw ork failure between the 
mobile nodes. 
 
2. Ad-Hoc On Demand Vector Routing protocol (AODV):  
It is a reactive/on -demand routing protocol. It is an extension of dynamic 
source routing protocol (DSR) and it helps to remove the disadvantage of 
dynamic source routi ng protocol. In DSR, after route discovery, when the 
source mobile node sends the data packet to the destination mobile 
node, it also contains the complete path in its header. Hence, as the 
network size increases, the length of the complete path also incre ases 
and the data packet’s header size also increases which makes the whole 
network slow. 
Hence, Ad-Hoc On Demand Vector Routing protocol came as solution to it. 
The main difference lies in the way of storing the path, AODV stores the path 
in the routing table whereas DSR stores it in the data packet’s header itself. 
It also operates in two phases in the similar fashion: Route discovery and 
Route maintenance.  

3. Hybrid Routing protocol: 
It basically combines the advantages of both, reactive and pro -active 
routing protocols. These protocols are adaptive in nature and adapts 
according to the zone and position of the source and destination mobile 
nodes. One of the most popular hybrid routing  protocol is Zone Routing 
Protocol (ZRP). 
The whole network is divided into different zones and then the position of 
source and destination mobile node is observed. If the source and destination 
mobile nodes are present in the same zone, then proactive rou ting is used for 
the transmission of the data packets between them. And if the source and 
destination mobile nodes are present in different zones, then reactive routing is 
used for the transmission of the data packets between them.  
 
Anycast Routing : 
A packet is delivered to the nearest member of a group, in 
anycast. Anycast routing finds these paths. Sometimes nodes 
provide a service, such as time of day or content distribution for 
which it is getting the right information all that matters, not the 
node that is contacted; any node will do. For example, anycast 
is used in the internet as part of  DNS. 
Topology : Regular distance vector and link state routing can 
produce anycast routes because there is no need to devise new 
routing schemes for anycast. Suppose we want to anycast to the 
members of group 1. They will be given the address “1”, 
instead of different addresses.  Distance vector routing will 
distribute vectors as usual, and nodes will choose the shortest 
path to destination 1. This will result in nodes sending to the 
nearest instance of destination 1. That is, it believes that  all the 
instances of node 1 are the same node . 

 
This procedure works for link state routing as well, although 
there is the added consideration that the routing protocol must 
not find seemingly short paths that pass through node 1. This 
would result in jumps through hyperspace, since the instances 
of node 1 are really nodes located in different parts of the 
network. 
Advantages of Anycast Routing:  
1. It provides intrinsic DDoS mitigation so that during failure 
it provides failover alternatives.  
2. A single DNS server configuration can be distributed to all 
of your network nodes.  
3. It provides faster connection by decreasing the number of 
hops and reducing latency.  
4. Load balancing can be utilized easily.  
Disadvantages of Anycast Routing:  


1. It requires additional hardware and proper traffic routing 
to implement IP Anycast.  
2. It requires higher maintenance co st for managing route 
announcements. 
 
 